Add core team statement on AI blog post draft (#3705)
nf-core/website: sites/main-site/src/content/blog/2026/statement-on-ai.mdx

---
title: "nf-core and AI"
subtitle: "Core team statement on AI within nf-core"
pubDate: 2026-01-21T10:00:00+01:00
embedHeaderImage: true
authors:
    - "James Fellows Yates"
label:
    - "community"
---

![Badly photoshop image of a Pigeon developing code on a laptop, and Maxime Garcia giving a thumbs up from the laptop screen](../../../assets/images/blog/satement-on-ai/maxime-pigeon.png)

> If a pigeon were to commit good code, I would accept it

\- _Maxime Garcia (@maxulysse), Jan. 2026_

## Short summary

> nf-core's policy remains unchanged. Humans are still ultimately responsible for their submitted code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
nf-core's policy remains unchanged. Humans are still ultimately responsible for their submitted code.

If you're using AI tools, try to stick by these guidelines:
- Keep PRs as small and focussed as possible
- Avoid any unnecessary changes, such as moving or refactoring code (unless that is the explicit intention of the PR)
- Review all generated code yourself before opening a PR, and ensure that you understand it all
- Engage with the community review process and expect to make revisions
```

## Background

> As everyone reading this is most likely aware, artifical intelligence (AI) and particularly Large Language Models (LLMs) have exploded in usage in many areas of society.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As everyone reading this is most likely aware, Large Language Models (LLMs) have exploded in usage in many areas of society usually under the term artifical intelligence (AI).
```

[^1]: https://github.com/nf-core/proposals/issues/91

[^2]: https://github.com/nf-core/proposals/issues/61

Despite the conflicting opinions and diversity of experiences, a consensus did appear to emerge which we feel will reflect the most inclusive approach on how AI and LLMs will be treated within nf-core.

## Pros and Cons

To briefly summarise the main arguments for and against the use of AI in code contributions to nf-core.

For the people who were very much in favour, they felt that:

- Their use of AI related tools made their development work more efficient, speeding up development
- The AI tools took over more boring leg work allowing them to work on more fun tasks
- In some cases the use of LLM tools can help with ensuring more consistency in code and quality across the community
- AIs are just ultimately tools, no different to linters, code formatters, or other automated tools already widely used - it's up to the human behind the keyboard not to abuse them

On the flip side people who were more skeptical said they worried about:

- AI code and automated reviews having variable and inconsistent quality
- Risk of increasing prevelance of 'drive-by PRs'

> - Risk of increasing the prelevance of low-effort but large contributions with significant code changes outside original scope (particularly from Agentic generated code)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Risk of increasing the prelevance of low-effort but large contributions with significant code changes outside original scope
```

---
title: "nf-core and AI"
subtitle: "Core team statement on AI within nf-core"

> pubDate: 2026-01-21T10:00:00+01:00

Author: ```suggestion
pubDate: 2026-01-14T10:00:00+01:00
```

The community will be mindful when assisting members who wish to apply AI tools to nf-core development, that we do not impact the experience of others.
For example, we will aim to not clutter the template with many AI helper files where unnecessary (e.g. `AGENT.md`, `CLAUDE.md`, `.mcp.json` etc.), but will consult with the community via blog posts and RFCs on [nf-core/proposals](https://github.com/nf-core/proposals).

We will also aim to further develop and promote best practice guidelines and etiquette.
For example, we hope to find approaches that encourage smaller, focused, and incremental feature PRs - something that will also benefit 'human' contributors, such as through faster review response time.

Finally, we will continue to monitor the situation and community feedback.
If at any point you have concerns about a PR or possible adoption of AI features in the community, feel free to contact the core team.

## Conclusion

To conclude, nothing changes within nf-core. Humans are still responsible for their code, regardless of the tools they use.

> _This statement was drafted by James Fellows Yates with help from GitHub Co-Pilot Pro's GPT-4.1 autocompletion. It was reviewed by the nf-core core team. However the image is pure, handmade, artisanal (terrible) 'photoshopping'._

Reviewer 3: 😆
